A LONG TERM
ECONOMIC PLAN
TO KEEP THE
RECOVERY GOING

GENERAL ELECTION 2016

2

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

Contents
6
8
11 
14 

Foreword from the Taoiseach
Executive Summary
A Strong Recovery but Challenges Ahead
The Long Term Economic Plan to
Keep the Recovery Going

20
25
30
34

More and Better Jobs (Step 1)
Making Work Pay (Step 2)
Investing in Public Services (Step 3)
Conclusion

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

03

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN

4

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

THIS YEAR MARKS THE CENTENARY
OF THE DECLARATION OF THE IRISH
REPUBLIC. IT PROVIDES US ALL WITH
A UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY “TO EXAMINE
NOT ONLY WHO WE WERE, BUT WHO
WE WANT TO BECOME AS A NATION, A
SOCIETY, A REAL REPUBLIC.”
Speech by An Taoiseach, Enda Kenny to the 78th Fine Gael Ard Fheis, 23 January 2016.

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

5

FOREWARDS

FOREWORD FROM

AN TAOISEACH

T

hanks to the hard work and resilience of the Irish people, our economy is now recovering.

Fine Gael’s commitment is to give our people the solid foundation on which they can build
their lives – no more boom and bust, no more reckless waste of taxpayers’ money, no more
sense of a crisis.
This Long Term Economic Plan offers our people the stability and certainty needed to keep the
recovery going. It has three steps:
1. More and Better Jobs
2. Making Work Pay
3. Investing in Public Services
By keeping the recovery going, the aim of our Plan is that by 2022 – the 100th anniversary of the
history of the State – Ireland will be a country which:
• Makes a job available to everyone who wants one
• Gives every family the supports needed to escape from poverty
• Has brought home at least 70,000 of our friends and family forced to leave because of the
crisis
• Gives every child an equal opportunity in life by providing the health, education and family
services they need
Fine Gael has learnt from the mistakes made by previous governments – we know that only a
strong economy that supports people at work can pay for the services needed for a just society.
We are determined not to let Ireland go back – not to those who wrecked our economy in the
first place, and not to those who would kill the recovery and jobs with new taxes on work.
In an uncertain world, our Long Term Economic Plan will reinforce Ireland’s position as a jobs
and family focused country of stability, growth and opportunity for all.
My commitment to you will be to keep it that way.
Together with the Irish people, Fine Gael will keep the recovery going.

6

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

RÉAMHRÁ ÓN

TAOISEACH

T

á an geilleagar ag téarnamh a bhuíochas d’obair chrua agus d’athléimneacht mhuintir na
hÉireann.

Is é tiomantas Fhine Gael bunchloch láidir a chur ar fáil do mhuintir na tíre seo - ní bheidh aon
chaint ar bhorradh agus cliseadh, ní chuirfear airgead na gcáiníocóirí amú, ní bheidh géarchéim le
brath níos mó.
Cuireann ár bPlean Eacnamaíochta Fadtéarmach an chobhsaíocht agus an chinnteacht a bhfuil gá leo
chun an téarnamh a choinneáil ag imeacht ar fáil. Tá trí chéim i gceist:
1. Níos Mó Postanna agus Postanna Níos Fearr
2. Pá Níos Fearr
3. Infheistíocht i Seirbhísí Níos Fearr
Agus an téarnamh á choinneáil ag imeacht againn, is é aidhm ár bplean ná go mbainfeadh Éire an
méid seo a leanas amach faoi 2022 - céad bliain i ndiaidh bhunú an Stáit:
• Post a chur ar fáil do gach duine is mian leis post a bheith aige
• Na tacaíochtaí riachtanacha a chur ar fáil do theaghlaigh ionas gur féidir leo éalú ón mbochtaineacht
• 70,000 duine dár dteaghlaigh agus dár gcairde a d’imigh mar gheall ar an ngéarchéim a thabhairt
abhaile
• Deis chothrom sa saol a thabhairt do gach leanbh trí na seirbhísí sláinte, oideachais agus teaghlaigh
a theastaíonn uathu a chur ar fáil dóibh
D’fhoghlaim Fine Gael ó na botúin a rinne rialtais a tháinig romhainn - tá a fhios againn nach féidir ach
le geilleagar láidir a thacaíonn le daoine i bhfostaíocht íoc as na seirbhísí riachtanacha le haghaidh
sochaí chóir.
Táimid tiomanta gan ligean d’Éire filleadh ar an aimsir a caitheadh - gan dul ar ais chucu siúd a scrios
an geilleagar ar an gcéad dul síos, agus chucu siúd a scriosfadh fostaíocht le cánacha nua.
Cabhróidh ár bPlean Eacnamaíochta Fadtéarmach le seasamh na hÉireann a neartú ionas go
mbeidh sí ina tír atá ar mhaithe le postanna agus le teaghlaigh agus ina tír ina mbeidh cobhsaíocht,
comhdheiseanna agus fás.
Geallaim duit go gcoinneoimid an tír ar an gcaoi sin.
I dteannta mhuintir na hÉireann, coinneoidh Fine Gael an téarnamh ag imeacht.

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

7

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

2: Executive Summary
Ireland is now the fastest growing economy in Europe. The Troika has gone and
the deficit has fallen from €18 billion in 2010 to just over €4 billion in 2015. Our
Long Term Economic Plan will create 200,000 extra jobs by 2020; reduce the
unemployment rate to 6%; and facilitate the return of at least 70,000 emigrants.
We will abolish the USC and invest more in Public Services.
None of us will ever forget the depth of the crisis which
gripped this country just five short years ago. A crisis
triggered by the collapse of a credit-fuelled property
bubble and the reckless mismanagement of the public
finances. An economy in freefall; banks on the brink
of collapse; 300,000 jobs destroyed; and Ireland’s
reputation in shreds. A country in a Troika bailout.
Five years on and the picture is very different –
thanks principally to the resilience and hard work of
the Irish people, aided by the policies of the current
Government. Ireland now has the fastest growing
economy in Europe, with 135,000 new jobs created.
The Troika has gone and international confidence has
been restored. The deficit has fallen from €18 billion in
2010 to just over €4 billion in 2015.
Of course, this huge reduction in the deficit helps
explain why the strong recovery has not yet been
felt in every household. While jobs and growth have
generated some €9 billion in extra tax revenue since
2011, 70% of the extra revenue has been allocated to
filling the massive hole in the public finances which
we inherited. With the deficit now in safer territory we
have started to use the extra resources to rebuild vital
services and to reduce excessive rates of taxation on
work. These efforts will accelerate over the second
term of a Fine Gael Government.
The Irish economy is not just growing. It is also
changing. A broad based, enterprise-led recovery
is reshaping Ireland’s economic landscape. This

8

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

new phase of strong economic growth is, unlike the
pre-crash bubble, no longer dependent upon just
one sector (construction) or high public spending.
Between 2000 and 2007 only 1% of the new jobs
created came from export orientated enterprises.
That corresponding figure now is 45%, across a
diverse range of sectors. Irish enterprise has clearly
learnt the lessons of the crash. It understands that
a small open economy must continually pursue new
sources of competitive advantage in order to win new
export markets.
The key question for us all now is how do we keep the
recovery going. Do we build on the sensible, enterprise
based policies of Fine Gael in the last government – or
do we return to the failed boom and bust policies of
Fianna Fáil? Do we keep moving forward towards full
employment and improved services – or do we allow
the populist and economically risky policies of parties
such as Sinn Fein to undermine the hard work and
sacrifices of the Irish people?
Ireland’s economic recovery is real. But so too are
the challenges which lie ahead, both short and long
term. Short term risks include a weakening global
economy and growth in Europe which is fragile at
best. The UK’s possible exit from the EU could also
have major negative implications for our country’s
economic future. Long term risks include Ireland’s
ageing population and climate change. Over the next
30 years the number of people over 65 will double,
while the number of us living to be over 80 is set to

quadruple, placing increasing pressure on services
such as the health service.
Only a strong, growing economy can help protect
Ireland from such risks and provide us with the
resources we need to rebuild vital services, cut taxes
and prepare our country for any economic shocks. But
there is no guarantee that such growth will happen.
We have seen in Greece the damage which poor policy
choices can inflict on a country. Growth in the Greek
economy has averaged less than 1% over the last two
decades. Our analysis suggests that a combination of
a global downturn, domestic political instability and a
radical lurch away from the pro-jobs policies pursued
in recent years could throw the Irish economy back
into a tail-spin, with unemployment rising to over 10%
and the deficit spiraling back up to 7% of GDP by 2021.
Any attempt by an Irish Government to raise spending
or lower taxes by €10 billion in such a scenario
would lead to another economic crisis, forcing that
Government to abandon its election promises.
That is why Fine Gael is publishing a Long Term
Economic Plan to keep the recovery going. We want
to avoid the policy mistakes of the past and to ensure
that everyone feels the benefit of economic growth
through more jobs, less taxes on work and better public
services. There has been a lot of debate recently about
the potential size of the so-called “fiscal space” over
the next five years, a piece of economic jargon which
essentially refers to how much extra resources the
next Government might have as a result of economic
growth. The reality, of course, is that the fiscal space
right now is zero. Extra resources will only become
available if we can keep the recovery going.
Our Long Term Economic Plan is built around three
specific but inter-related steps.

Step 1. More and Better Jobs: We are planning
to create 200,000 extra jobs by 2020; reduce the
unemployment rate to 6%; and facilitate the return of
at least 70,000 emigrants.
• F
 ine Gael will make sure that all of the regions
see a significant fall in unemployment. The
unemployment rate in every region should be
within at least 1 percentage point of the national
rate by 2020.
• A new Future Jobs Investment Fund will help
future-proof our economy and ensure that full
employment is maintained over the longer term.

Step 2 – Making Work Pay: By completing the
abolition of the USC by 2020 we will cut marginal
and effective tax rates for everybody at work to
encourage more entrepreneurship, greater labour
market participation and the return of our friends and
family from abroad.
• Fine Gael is determined to maintain a fair and
broad tax base even as we reduce tax rates. One of
the biggest policy errors of previous Governments
was to overly narrow the tax base, making Ireland
highly dependent on revenues from the property
bubble. Revenues which quickly disappeared after
the bursting of that bubble.
• Fine Gael will also introduce a series of targeted
measures to help parents return to work and to
overcome welfare traps including cutting the
cost of childcare, abolishing GP fees for children,
introduce a new Working Family Payment to
ensure that every parent working 15 hours or more
per week takes home at least €11.75 per hour. We
will also support sensible increases in the minimum
wage over a 5-year period, mitigated by reductions
in the lower rate of Employers’ PRSI to protect jobs.

Step 3 – Investing in Public Services: A
growing economy and increasing numbers back at
work is already allowing us to invest more in services.
Over the next five years Fine Gael’s Long Term
Economic Plan will allocate €4.2 billion in increased
resources for improved services. This will fund, among
other things, over 10,000 additional doctors, nurses,
Gardaí, teachers, social workers and other frontline service professionals within a well-run and cost
effective public service. We will also deliver targeted
improvements in welfare payments and services for
the elderly, the disabled, the sick and carers, among
others.
• The extra resources being made available for
service investment include provisions for sensible
pay increases (after the Lansdowne Road
Agreement), targeted welfare improvements, and
for other pressures (over and above a provision for
addressing demographic costs).
• T
 hey also include some spending increases above
the rate of inflation – on pensions for example –
and significant savings in other areas such as
procurement costs.

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

9

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Chart 1: Long Term Trajectory of Government Debt

Chart 1 looks at how Ireland’s
debt burden will fall as Fine Gael’s
Long Term Economic Plan is
implemented.

Securing the Recovery
Our priorities for the first years of a second term in
Government will be to create more jobs, cut taxes on
work in a sensible and sustainable manner and invest
in vital services. Every citizen of this country needs to
feel tangible benefits from the recovery which their
hard work has delivered. We know this is not yet the
case for everyone.
But the next Government will also need to make a
very important decision as the economy approaches
full employment in 2020, even as the work of cutting
taxes and improving services continues. It can either:
• Adopt the “when I have it I’ll spend it” mantra of
Charlie McCreevy. The risk of this approach is that
it will, as happened in the Celtic Tiger, dangerously
overheat the economy and set it up for a fall; or
• Put in place systems and rules which will ensure that
the mistakes of the past are not repeated.
Fine Gael is determined to choose the latter option.
1.

Over the next five years, our Expenditure Rule
will limit new budgetary commitments each year
to below the long-term sustainable growth rate
of the economy or just over €10.1 billion over
a 5 year period. While this is less than half the
spending growth and tax cuts in Fianna Fáil’s five
budgets prior to the economic crash in 2008, it is
sufficient on our forecasts to ensure a steady and
sustainable improvement in people’s lives over the
coming years.

2. W
 e will establish a Contingency and Stability
Reserve in 2019. This reserve is effectively an

10

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

insurance policy against future economic shocks.
Money will be put aside when the economy is
at or near full employment and invested when
the economy falters. We never want Ireland to
experience again the boom and bust policies
which wrecked our economy and destroyed the
lives of so many of our people.

Conclusion: A Strong Economy and a Just
Society
Some parties in this election want to offer the Irish
people a false choice: you can have either a stronger
economy or a fairer society. However, the collapse
of the Celtic Tiger made one thing clear: it is simply
not possible to build a fair and just society without
a strong and stable economy. The Fianna Fáil boom
and bust approach to economic management didn’t
just wreck our economy. It also placed our citizens,
their families and local communities under enormous
pressure and forced tens of thousands of our people
to leave Ireland in search of a better future.
Fine Gael’s Long Term Economic Plan will deliver
the kind of jobs-rich, broad based growth which our
people need. Only a strong economy, with sustainable
full employment, can lift tens of thousands of our
citizens out of poverty and encourage our emigrants
to return home. Only a strong economy, lead by
a competitive and resilient enterprise sector, can
generate the resources we need to fund sustainable,
quality services and to deliver a truly just society
for all.

3: A Strong Recovery
but Challenges Ahead
Fine Gael has created 135,000 extra jobs while the unemployment rate is now
8.6%, the lowest it has been for seven years. Government Debt has declined
from a high of 120% in 2012 to less than 97% in 2015. But the global economy is
slowing and the country faces other external challenges. Ireland needs a Long
Term Economic Plan which will keep the recovery going.
Fine Gael was elected in 2011 on a mandate to fix
our public finances and get Ireland working again.
The previous economic plan put in place by Fianna
Fáil was squeezing the life out of the economy with
ever more taxes on work to pay penal debt servicing
costs for the bail-out. In order to inject badly needed
momentum into the economy, the new Government
negotiated five key changes to the EU-IMF Programme
of Support to give our a country a chance to recover:
1.	We secured a halving of the interest rates on
the EU bail-out loans, saving the taxpayer €10
billion over their lifetime, and an extension of
the loan maturities, reducing the cash borrowing
requirement by €20 billion over a decade;
2. W
 e replaced the Promissory Notes as part of the
liquidation of IBRC (formerly Anglo Irish Bank)
with much cheaper Central Bank funding. The
original bail-out plan required the Irish taxpayer
to pay over €3 billion every year into Anglo Irish
Bank until 2023. This action, together with the
interest rate reductions and improved market
confidence in Ireland, has cut the annual interest
bill by €4 billion per year by 2015 compared with
the previous Fianna Fáil plan;
3. W
 e immediately cut the VAT rate on the hospitality
sector to 9% from 13.5%, and implemented a further
2,305 individual job-creation measures under the
annual Action Plan for Jobs process, with the goal
of creating over 100,000 additional jobs;
4. W
 e reversed Fianna Fáil’s cut to the minimum
wage which, when combined with an immediate

cut in Employers’ PRSI on lower-income workers,
improved work incentives and treated lowerincome workers more fairly without adding to
employment costs; and
5. W
 e abandoned €630 million in proposed income
tax increases in 2012, 2013 and 2014 under the
previous plan (at least €500 per taxpayer) – on
top of the USC which the Fianna Fáil had already
introduced. This would have further damaged the
incentive to work and put families under additional
financial pressures.
Five years later, and it is evident that the Irish economy
is making solid progress:
• Ireland has been the fastest growing economy in
Europe, with GDP growing at just under 7% in 2015.
• The General Government deficit has fallen from
€18 billion in 2010 to €4 billion in 2015, while
Government Debt has declined from a high of 120%
in 2012 to less than 97% in 2015 and is forecast to
be less than 93% in 2016.
• The Troika has gone and international confidence
has been restored. Ireland raised €3 billion earlier
this month with an interest rate of 1.15%. This
compares to bond yields of over 14% in July 2011.
This strong economic performance reflects a jobsrich recovery, with growth benefiting from an easing
in the pace of fiscal consolidation and continued low
interest rates which are allowing households and firms
to strengthen their balance sheets. While strength in
export markets has been a major positive, the latest

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

11

A STRONG RECOVERY BUT CHALLENGES AHEAD

quarterly bulletin from the Central Bank makes it clear
that the domestic economy is also recovering rapidly.
“The strong growth performance reflects a
recovery which has become broadly based
and has increasingly come to be driven by a
significant rebound in domestic demand. While
methodological changes to the National Accounts
and some changes to the activities of multi-national
firms complicate the interpretation of the data
and overstate the strength of domestic demand,
the pick-up in consumption and the continuing
strength of employment growth confirm that a
convincing recovery is well established on the
domestic side of the economy.”
The overall impact on job growth has been very
positive. Our programme has created 135,000 extra
jobs – more than the 100,000 Fine Gael promised in
2011. The unemployment rate is now 8.6%, the lowest it
has been for seven years, and compares to a Eurozone
average of 10.7%. Youth unemployment is also falling
and is below the Euro area average. The deficit has
fallen from €18 billion in 2010 to just over €4 billion
in 2015, allowing us to start reducing the excessive
rates of USC and income taxes that punish hard work.
The process of rebuilding our public services has also
begun. The recruitment and training of new Gardaí
has restarted while over 1,600 more teachers will be
recruited from September. Spending on health will
increase by €800 million this year compared to the
budget allocation for 2015.

A New Economy
But the Irish economy is not just growing. It is also
changing. The new Irish economy is no longer
dependent upon just one sector – construction – or
high public spending. A broad based, enterprise led
recovery is reshaping Ireland’s economic landscape,
as the figures below clearly demonstrate:
• 66% of the growth in jobs between 2000 and
2007 was driven by construction and increased
spending on public services. Only 1% of the new
jobs came from export orientated enterprises.
• The contrast with the last few years could not
be more stark. 45% of new jobs have come from
export orientated enterprises, driven by a growing
number of start-ups; an increasing presence in
emerging technologies; major transformations in
traditional business sectors; an increased focus
on innovation and much greater diversification in
exports.

12

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

Irish enterprise has clearly learnt the lessons of the
crash. It understands that a small open economy
must continually pursue new sources of competitive
advantage in order to win new export markets. This
new resilience must be protected and developed. That
is why a key part of the Long Term Economic Plan
is the implementation of the Government’s various
interlocking strategies on Entrepreneurship, Skills,
Innovation, and the delivery of the transformation
agendas of agencies such as the IDA and Enterprise
Ireland.
It should be noted that the strength and
transformational nature of the Irish recovery contrasts
sharply with the experience of many other European
countries. Greece, for instance, is currently experiencing
anemic growth and an unemployment rate which
is twice the eurozone average. While joblessness is
falling in Spain the unemployment rate still stood at
over 21% percent in the third quarter - the second
worst performance in the eurozone after Greece.

A Fair Recovery
Despite the depth of the recession, and the appalling
state of the public finances inherited by the last
Government, Ireland has been able to maintain
average European levels of Net Income Inequality.
This is largely due to a very progressive system
of taxation which transfers significant amounts of
income from the better off to the worse off in society.
The Irish tax system imposes a lower tax burden on
the low paid, compared to other countries. Chart 2
shows the tax burden borne by individuals earning
67% of median wages across the OECD. Fine Gael’s
Long Term Economic Plan will maintain Ireland’s
progressive tax system, while abolishing the USC.

But the Job is Not Finished and Significant
Challenges Lie Ahead
The Irish economic recovery is real and our Plan is
designed to keep that recovery going. But there is,
clearly, a long way to go. We know that the recovery
is incomplete. Too many families have yet to feel the
benefits. Unemployment remains too high. Too many
continue to struggle to pay the bills. Our citizens
remain nervous about the risks ahead and worried
about the danger of the economy slipping back. The
open nature of Ireland’s economy means that we are
particularly vulnerable to external shocks. The risks in
this regard are twofold:

Chart 2: Low Taxes on the Low Paid

• Increased risks for global economic growth and
deflation are reflected in falling commodity prices
generally and declining oil prices in particular. The
International Monetary Fund recently cut its global
growth forecasts for the third time in less than a
year. Falling oil prices are, in turn, contributing to
growing instability in the Middle East and other
energy-rich location. China’s annual growth rate
has dropped to its lowest level in a quarter of a
century, while the quarterly bulletin from the Irish
central bank points to a recovery in the euro area
which is “timid” at best and is happening “amid
more challenging external conditions including
concerns about the resilience of growth in some
emerging market economies and expectations
about diverging monetary policies in advanced
economies.”
• The UK’s potential exit from the EU is another
major risk for Ireland. Around €1 billion of trade is
conducted between the two countries every week,
consisting mainly of agricultural products, food and
financial services. The UK is Ireland’s second most
important trade partner and destination. Any new
trade barriers or tariffs following a UK exit could
lead to a significant Irish GDP per capita losses.
Over the longer term Ireland will also need to respond
to the challenges posed by climate change, an ageing
population and job polarisation.

A 2014 report from the European Commission’s
Joint Research Council shows that even if a global
temperature rise is limited to 2 degrees centigrade,
major economic costs will arise as a result of both
river and sea flooding.
• An Ageing Population: Over the next 30 years
the number of people over 65 will double, while
the number of us living to be over 80 is set to
quadruple, requiring major changes in how we
fund and deliver services.
• Job Polarisation: Various analyses have identified
increasing polarisation within the jobs markets
of developed countries. A polarised or U-shaped
jobs market is one where jobs which either require
greater / lower skills are created at the higher
/ lower end of the wage scale, while jobs which
require moderate skills are either in decline or
static in the middle.
All of these challenges point to the need for a stable
Government with a long term plan. A plan which looks
with confidence to the future, but includes measures
which will allow the next Government to learn from
the mistakes of the past, and to better insulate Ireland
from both external shocks and the longer term
challenges of climate and demographic change and
job polarisation.

• Climate Change: Six of the ten warmest years
in Ireland have occurred since 1990, according
to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

13

THE LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
TO KEEP THE RECOVERY GOING

4: The Long Term
Economic Plan to
Keep the Recovery Going
Baseline Economic Forecast

These projections are derived by taking the
Department of Finance forecasts, as per Budget 2016,
as our starting point. These growth projections may
well prove to be conservative in the short run. The
Plan, for instance, projects GDP growth of 4.3% in
2016 and 3.6% in 2017, compared to forecasts by the
Central Bank of 4.8% and 4.4%, respectively. We have
then modelled how these forecasts would change
when the fiscal space is allocated consistent with our
Long Term Economic Plan, outlined in Table 1. To do
this we use standard multipliers which calculate the
impact of tax and spending policies on economic
growth, unemployment and the budget balance. By
modelling in this way we can understand the impact
of our policies on the economy in the medium to long
term, so that we can then follow prudent sustainable
policies.

While credible domestic policies were crucial to
the recovery that began in 2013, more recently
international factors have also played a supporting
role – rising demand in the UK and U.S. markets,
expansionary ECB monetary policies, a boost to
our competitiveness from a weakening euro and a
sharp decline in oil prices. While these forces are a
welcome boost, they are likely to be temporary. Our
Plan projects an easing of economic growth to more
sustainable rates over the coming years. Specifically,
our Long Term Economic Plan targets:
• Steady, sustainable and well-balanced growth
averaging just under 3.5% per annum;
• Employment growth of 1.5%-2% per year across all
regions, adding 200,000 jobs by 2020 compared
to 2015 Q3 and cutting the unemployment rate to
below 6% nationally;

Lower government debt is a key aim of the Long
Term Economic Plan in order to provide a safety
buffer against future risks. We employ a standard
debt dynamics formula to calculate the impact of
our policies and projected growth rates on our debt
levels. We project that Irish government debt levels

• Sustainable growth in wages, productivity and
living standards of at least 2% per year; and
• A decline in Government debt to 77% of GDP by
2021, and to below 60% of GDP by 2026
Table 1: Baseline Economic Forecasts

Real
RealGDP
GDPGrowth
Growth(%
(%change)
change)
Real
GDP Growth
(%(%
change)
Unemployment
Unemployment
Rate
Rate
(%
of
oflabour
labourforce)
force)
Unemployment
Rate
(% of labour force)
Employment
Employment
Level
Level
('000s)
('000s)
Employment
('000s)
Wage
WageGrowth
GrowthLevel
(%
(%change)
change)
Wage Growth
(% change)
General
Government
Balance
General
Government
Balance(%
(%of
ofGDP)
GDP)
General
Government
Balance
(%
of
GDP)
Structural
StructuralBudget
BudgetBalance
Balance(%
(%of
ofGDP)
GDP)
Structural
Budget Balance
General
General
Government
Government
Debt
Debt(%
(%of
ofGDP)
GDP)
General Government Debt (% of GDP)

14

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

2017
2017
2017
3.6
3.6
3.6
7.7
7.7
7.7
2,067
2,067
2,067
2.6
2.6
2.6
-0.3
-0.3
-0.3
-1.1
-1.1
-1.1
90
90
90

2018
2018
2018
3.4
3.4
3.4
7.1
7.1
7.1
2,108
2,108
2.6
2.6
2,108
2.6
0.1
0.1
0.1
-0.5
-0.5
-0.5
86
86
86

2019
2019
2019
3.5
3.5
3.5
6.5
6.5
6.5
2,148
2,148
2,148
2.6
2.6

2020
2020
2020
3.4
3.4
3.4
6.0
6.0
6.0
2,187
2,187
2,187
2.6
2.6

2021
2021
2021
3.3
3.3
3.3
5.6
5.6
5.6
2,224
2,224
2,224
2.6
2.6

2.6
0.1
0.1
0.1
-0.3
-0.3

2.6
0.1
0.1
0.1
-0.2
-0.2

2.6
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

-0.3
84
84
84

-0.2
8181
81

0.1
76
76
76

Chart 3: Long Term Trajectory of Government Debt

will fall well below the EU average by 2021 through a
combination of steady economic growth, continued
fiscal prudence and the sale of at least half of the
taxpayers’ stakes in the bailed-out banks over the next
five years (with the rest to be sold over the following
five years). All proceeds from the disposal of these
assets will be used to pay down government debt.
Under these assumptions, our Plan would cut Ireland’s
debt burden in 10 years’ time (2026) to half that of
2012 when debt peaked at over 120% (see Chart 3).
Under the EU Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) public
debt is considered excessive if it exceeds 60% of GDP
without diminishing at an adequate rate.

The Expenditure Rule
Given the uncertainty over growth rates, at the very
heart of our Long Term Economic Plan is a commitment
to never again repeat Fianna Fáil’s mistake of using a
temporary period of unsustainable growth to make
reckless spending commitments that destabilise the
economy, undermine our competitiveness and then
have to be painfully reversed.

The commitment is given effect through the
Expenditure Rule. This will limit annual growth in
government spending (net of discretionary tax
measures) to at or below the sustainable growth rate
of the economy, as estimated over ten years (see Box
x below for an overview). The underlying principle at
work here is that increases in government spending
are capped at a level which the economy can afford
in the long term.
If our Expenditure Rule had been followed in 20012007 then the depth of the economic crisis would
have been avoided. In each of those years, in budget
after budget, this rule was broken and spending was
allowed to increase by more than we could sustainably
afford. Over the seven years in total, adjusted
government expenditure was allowed to increase by
130%. Less than half of this increase would have been
allowed under the Expenditure Benchmark, which
would have left our public finances in a better position
in 2008 to withstand the bursting of the property
bubble, avoiding a lot of unnecessary pain for our
people.

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

15

THE LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
TO KEEP THE RECOVERY GOING

Box 1: Explaining the Fiscal Space
Fiscal space is the amount of resources available for increased spending and tax reductions. You get fiscal
space by growing the economy because as more jobs are created tax revenues increase and spending on
welfare payments decreases. Each person that moves from the Live Register into a job creates €20,000
per year for the exchequer.
The fiscal space is calculated by ensuring our budgets comply with the Expenditure Rule. The Department
of Finance have said that there is €8.6 billion net fiscal space available over the years 2017-2021.
Others have argued for a lower figure to allow existing spending to increase in line with inflation. Our Long
Term Economic Plan makes provision for this in certain areas (e.g. pensions which we increase above the
rate on inflation), but it is inappropriate for other areas, such as public procurement, where our plan will
lower costs, not increase them.
So €8.6 billion is the starting point. A further €1.5 billion will be added to this once the Medium-Term
(budgetary) Objective (MTO) is met in 2018, consistent with our plan. So the Long Term Economic Plan is
based on a fiscal space of €10.1 billion.

Meeting the Expenditure Rule in 2017-21 will:
• Limit new tax and spending commitments – after
taking account of decisions already made on capital
investment, public service pay, non-indexation
of the tax system, demographic pressures and
other obligations – to €10.1 billion in net terms (see
Table 2);
• Deliver, by 2018, on the obligation in domestic and
EU law to bring our public finances into “structural
balance” (adjusting for cyclical factors), will be
defined as a Medium Term Objective (MTO) of
-0.5% of GDP (previously 0%).

• Eliminate new government borrowing by 2018
on the basis of our baseline economic forecasts,
and keep the public finances broadly in balance
thereafter; and
• Cut General Government Debt – when combined
with our commitment to sell at least half of the
taxpayers’ stakes in the banks over the next five
years – to 77% of GDP by 2021 – well below the
expected EU average.
Table 3 below summarises the total fiscal
commitments under the Long Term Economic Plan.
Of course, the sustainable growth rate of the economy

Box 2: The Expenditure Rule
Ireland’s improved budget performance in 2015 means that we have now exited the corrective arm of the
Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), as our excessive deficit requirement is now less than 3% of GDP. From
2016 on the Irish public finances will instead be subject to what is called the preventative arm of the SGP,
which is about ensuring sound budgetary policies over the medium term. In order to do this the SGP sets a
specified fiscal target, called a Medium-Term (budgetary) Objective (MTO), which includes the Expenditure
Benchmark.
The expenditure benchmark is a limit on the growth rate of real expenditure; the GDP deflator is then
applied to calculate allowable nominal growth in spending. The reference rate of potential growth used
to set the real expenditure growth rate is calculated using a forward and backward looking ten year
average. As an example the expenditure benchmark permits nominal expenditure growth of 1.8% in 2016.
The expenditure benchmark interacts with the MTO, such that if a country is not yet at its MTO then
a ‘convergence margin’ is applied which reduces the benchmark potential growth applied, and so the
expenditure benchmark. The value of the convergence margin is set to deliver a 0.6pp annual improvement
in the structural balance so that the expenditure benchmark supports adjustment towards our MTO. In our
forecasts the MTO is met in 2018 which means that the convergence margin is no longer applied in 2019 and
the expenditure benchmark thus increases which allows fiscal space of €1.5bn in 2019.

16

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

Table 2: Fiscal Space in Long Term Economic Plan for New Tax and Spending Commitment
2017
2017

2018
2018

2019

2020
2020

2021
2021

Total
Total

Gross Fiscal Space as per 2016 Budget Book
1,346
Add: Discretionary Revenue Measures
100
Adjusted Fiscal Space
1,446
Less:
320
Lansdowne Road Agreement (Pay and Pensions Already Committed)
Infrastructure and Capital Spending Commitments Already Made in "Building on Recovery"
46
Other Voted Committed Spending (Carry-Over, Demographics etc., less Falling Live Register) 401
Other Non-Voted Committed Spending (EU Budget Contributions etc.)
92
Net Fiscal Space
587
Add: Change in Minimum Medium Term Objective from 0% of GDP to -0.5%
0
Revised Net Fiscal Space under Long Term Economic Plan
587

1,501

1,660

3,226

3,336

11,070

depends on the types of policies being implemented
by Government – there will be no resources for tax
reform or better services if the recovery stalls because
of political instability or a radical lurch away from the
pro-jobs pro-investment policies set out in this Plan.
It is simply not credible for opposition parties to be
committing to spending resources generated by
the economic policies that they have opposed and
continue to oppose.

THE LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN – THE
THREE STEPS
The Long Term Economic Plan allocates the e10.1
billion in resources for new budgetary commitments
available under the Expenditure Rule to three specific
but inter-related steps designed to keep the recovery
going, as well as to a Contingency and Stability
Reserve to guard against unforeseen risks, as follows:

Step 1 – More and Better Jobs: Our Plan aims
to create 200,000 extra jobs by 2020; reduce the
unemployment rate to 6%; and facilitate the return of
at least 70,000 emigrants.
Building on existing job creation strategies, and taking
advantage of the preferential treatment of investment
under the Expenditure Rule, we will use €1 billion of
the available fiscal space to ring-fence an additional
€4 billion in capital investment over the five year

468

400

400

400

1,768

1,969

2,060

3,626

3,736

12,838
640

320

0

0

0

108

174

258

325

912

296

384

434

459

1,974

199

183

174

-9

640

1,046

1,319

2,760

2,961

8,672

0

1,463

0

0

1,463

1,046

2,782

2,760

2,961

10,135

period 2017-21 for a new Future Jobs Investment
Fund to help future-proof the economy and our jobs
plan against rising global risks and challenges.

Step 2 – Making Work Pay: We will allocate
€2.5 billion to tax reform to make work pay. By
completing the abolition of the USC by 2020 as a part
of a wider reform of the income tax system, we will
cut marginal and effective tax rates for everybody at
work to encourage entrepreneurship, labour market
participation and return migration, while further
broadening the income and wider tax base to sustain
public service improvements.
Fine Gael will also introduce a series of targeted
measures to help parents return to work and overcome
welfare traps, including cutting the cost of childcare,
abolishing GP fees for children, and introducing a new
Working Family Payment to ensure that every parent
working 15 hours or more per week takes home at
least €11.75 per hour. We will also support sensible
increases in the minimum wage over a 5-year period.

Step 3 – Investing in Public Services: A
growing economy and increasing numbers back at
work is already allowing us to invest more in services.
Over the next five years Fine Gael’s Long Term
Economic Plan will allocate €4.2 billion for improved
services and other pressures (over and above a large
provision for addressing demographic costs). This

Table 3:  Fiscal Commitments under Long Term Economic Plan, 2017-2021

Step 1 - More and Better Jobs (Fiscal Space Used Up by €4bn Jobs Fund)
Step 2 - Making Work Pay (Fiscal Space Used by USC Abolition and Other Tax Changes)
Step 3 - Investing in Public Services (Fiscal Space Used by Extra Current Spending)

1,000
2,458
4,182

Contingency and Stability Reserve

2,496

Total

10,135

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

17

THE LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
TO KEEP THE RECOVERY GOING

10%
25%

More and
Better Jobs
(“Future
and Jobs
Investment
Fund”)

CHART 4

Contingency and Stability
Reserve

24%

Step 2 - Making Work Pay
(incl. USC Abolition)

41%

Step 3 - Investing in
Public Services

will fund, among other things, over 10,000 additional
doctors, nurses, Gardaí, teachers, social workers and
other front-line service professionals within a wellrun and cost effective public service. We will also
deliver targeted improvements in welfare payments
and services for the elderly, the disabled, the sick and
carers, among oth2These steps are analysed in much
greater detail in Sections 5-7.

Contingency and Stability Reserve: Our Long Term
Economic Plan will leave e2.5 billion of the available
fiscal space unallocated as a “Contingency and Stability
Reserve”. This Reserve will act as a buffer against
unexpected shocks, both domestic and international,
and will be allocated according to a set of conditions
to be set out by Government in Budget 2017, with
the advice of the Irish Fiscal Advisory Council. The
money will either be saved (used for additional debt
reduction) or injected into the economy, in line with
the needs of economic and fiscal stability.

Risk Analysis
Part of prudent economic management is to subject
economic plans to risk analysis. We have analysed
what might happen if the economy was hit by a global
downturn. Revised forecasts for this new ‘scenario’
are modelled using multipliers derived by the ESRI
which estimate the impact of a global growth shock

18

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

Funding the Long Term
Economic Plan (Allocation
of the 10.1 Billion Net Fiscal
Space)
25% - Contingency and
Stability Reserve
10% - More and Better
Jobs (“Future and Jobs
Investment Fund”)
24% - Step 2 - Making Work
Pay (incl. USC Abolition)
41% - Step 3 - Investing in
Public Services

on Irish output, and on our deficit and debt levels.
Under this scenario we have assumed that global
growth is 2% less in 2017 than currently forecast (see
Table 4). In response we have reduced Irish economic
economic growth in all five years from 2017 to 2021,
with growth almost halving in 2017. Two points should
be emphasised:
• The unemployment rate continues to fall, albeit at
a slower rate than in our baseline forecast, assisted
by Fine Gael’s policy choices such as the Future
Jobs Fund.
• General Government debt also continues to fall,
reaching 63% of GDP by 2026 compared to 58% in
our baseline forecast. 			
We have also modelled a second risk scenario (Table
5) where the shock to global growth is accompanied
by political instability and poor domestic policy
choices which undermine the domestic recovery, for
example through:
• Shifting the tax burden back onto work and income
from other sources;
• Increasing already-high marginal tax rates;
• Policies that result in excessive increases in the
minimum wage and other employment costs

Table 4: Shock to Global Growth of 2% in 2017

2017
2.0

2018
3.2

2019
3.3

2020
3.2

2021
3.3

Unemployment Rate (% of labour force)

8.3

7.8

7.3

6.9

6.5

General Government Balance (% of GDP)

-0.5

-0.3

-0.3

-0.5

-0.5

92

89

87

86

82

2017
1.0

2018
1.0

2019
1.0

2020
1.0

2021
1.0

Unemployment Rate (% of labour force)

8.7

9.1

9.5

9.9

10.5

General Government Balance (% of GDP)

-1.8

-2.8

-4.2

-5.5

-6.8

General Government Debt (% of GDP)

94

96

100

106

113

Real GDP Growth (% change)

General Government Debt (% of GDP)

Table 5: Global Shock AND a Departure from Sound Domestic Policies

Real GDP Growth (% change)

• Abandoning the policy of selling the state’s stakes
in domestic banks. Any change in this policy
would raise serious questions about Ireland’s
determination to reduce Government debt levels,
and would almost certainly push up borrowing
costs.
• A shift away from the pro-enterprise and pro-jobs
policies which have underpinned the recovery,
resulting in a loss of international confidence.
We derived these macroeconomic forecasts by
examining what might happen if domestic economic
growth fell to 1% real GDP growth, or 1.6% in nominal
terms. This is what happened to Greece over the last
20 years. Annual growth averaged 0.92% from 1996
until 2015, with GDP contracting by 0.90% in the third
quarter of 2015 over the same quarter of the previous
year.

We then used standard multipliers to model the
impact of this on unemployment and the budget
balance. The impact on our debt models was again
calculated using a standard debt dynamics formula..
The impact of this scenario on unemployment, the
deficit and our debt levels is striking with all three
starting to increase dramatically. This highlights the
crucial importance of domestic economic choices to
keep the recovery going. The alternative is a return to
the dark days of the crisis.
Any attempt by an Irish Government to raise spending
or lower taxes by €10 billion in such a scenario
would lead to another economic crisis, forcing that
Government to abandon its election promises.

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

19

MORE AND BETTER JOBS

5: M
 ore and Better Jobs
(Step 1)
There is good reason to be confident about Ireland’s future, even taking into
account certain key risks. The economic recovery is robust while the country
enjoys a number of comparative advantages.
STEP 1 of our Long Term Economic Plan is
to create More and Better Jobs.

2. Help ensure that the unemployment rate in each
region is within one percent of the State average
by the same date. We will broaden and further
embed the APJ process by implementing eight
regional Action Plans for Jobs, supported by a
€250m fund, and reinforce the role of the Western
Development Commission (WDC); and

There is good reason to be confident about Ireland’s
future, even taking into account certain key risks. The
economic recovery is robust while the country enjoys
a number of comparative advantages. It continues
to be an attractive location for investment while our
labour force is relatively young, flexible and welleducated. Social cohesion remains strong and the
fiscal adjustment has been achieved as fairly and as
quickly as possible. The business taxation regime is
predictable and (for the most part) competitive and is
supported by a pro-enterprise political and regulatory
environment.

Our ambition is to reach a total of 2.187 million
people in employment by 2020 and to sustain
full employment thereafter. We envisage that the
enterprise development agencies will contribute a
significant percentage of this increase in employment.

As a result of all of these factors Fine Gael has been
able to help businesses add 135,000 extra jobs since
the Action Plan for Jobs was launched in 2012 – 35%
more than the 100,000 new jobs to which Fine Gael
committed itself in 2011. The unemployment rate is
now 8.6% compared to a eurozone average of 10.7%,
the lowest it has been for seven years.

We are aware that this will be challenging and that
we have no control over global demand and other
external factors. We can, however, strongly influence
our chances of success by supporting the productive
sector, leveraging existing comparative advantages
in key sectors, building innovation clusters and and
improving our capacity to innovate.

Our jobs target for a second term is even more
ambitious. We want to deliver nothing less than
sustainable full employment, where everyone who
needs a job can find one. Our Long Term Economic
Plan will:
1. Deliver an extra 200,000 jobs by 2020, in
accordance with the Enterprise 2025 strategy,
leading to more people at work than even before
and an unemployment rate of 6%. Almost half
of the jobs will be created in the export sector
(including tourism);

20

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

3. Facilitate the return of 70,000 Irish emigrants
back to Ireland and into work.

Future Jobs Investment Fund
To build on – and reinforce - hundreds of other job
creation measures already set out in Enterprise 2025,
the national Action Plan for Jobs, the Regional Action
Plans for Jobs, the Skills Strategy, the Entrepreneurship
strategy and Innovation 2020, the Long Term
Economic Plan will fund an additional €4 billion for
capital investment over the five year period 2017-21
(over and above the €27 billion in exchequer capital
already committed over this period for infrastructure

and other capital projects). This will be ring-fenced for
a new Future Jobs Investment Fund to help futureproof the economy and our jobs plan against rising
global risks and challenges.

• Techno-economic aspects of the emerging “Sharing
Economy” and other disruptive technologies

As part of the annual APJ process, the Future Jobs
Investment Fund will be allocated by Government on
a competitive basis to public / private collaborations
with credible initiatives that best address key national
challenges. That means that the Fund will be used each
year in support of the annual Action Plan for Jobs to
help deliver on specific, high impact measures in each
Plan so that the target of sustainable full employment
by 2020 can be achieved.

The last four years have proven that with the right
policy support Irish enterprise can deliver world class
performance. In order to build on the successes of Irish
companies during the recovery, Fine Gael in a second
term will commit itself to fully implement Enterprise
2025, a 10-year jobs and enterprise strategy designed
to deliver sustainable, enterprise-based jobs growth.
Fine Gael will use the very successful Action Plan for
Jobs (APJ) process to implement this strategy in a
second term. The APJ has been strongly welcomed by
industry and described by the OECD as “an important
innovation in Irish governance.” Sectoral growth
strategies for food, agriculture, tourism, financial
services, aviation, transport and retail will also be
implemented.

We will establish a new Long Term Economic Plan
Delivery Unit within the Department of An Taoiseach
to co-ordinate, with the advice and input of the
National Competitiveness Council, the work of all
relevant Departments (particularly the Departments
of Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform and
Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation) in managing the
competitive process and making recommendations
to Government on the allocations.
Consistent with this mandate, the new Long Term
Economic Planning Unit will also coordinate a new
annual interaction between the Taoiseach, other
ministers and the Irish Academy of Engineering on a
range of key long-term policy challenges facing the
country including:
• Climate change mitigation and adaptation
• Energy policy and related environmental issues
• Planning and delivering national infrastructure
priorities
• Technological solutions in the health sector
• Cost-effective transportation solutions – roads, rail,
airport and harbours
• Communication
infrastructure,
broadband and security issues

including

Supporting Irish Enterprise

Key enterprise targets for a second term include:
• 2-2.5% productivity growth per annum in Irish
companies
• A 50% increase in exports by Irish companies by
2020
• Achieving a consistent top 3 ranking among small
countries in relevant international competitiveness
rankings
In order to meet this latter goal Fine Gael will transform
the National Competitiveness Council (NCC) into the
Competitiveness and Productivity Commission of
Ireland (CPCI). The Commission’s remit will be to:
• Independently assess, and comment publicly on,
whether policy actions and initiatives are consistent
with maintaining Ireland’s competitiveness.
• Produce reliable independent evidence on the
costs of doing business in Ireland and benchmark
Ireland’s competitiveness performance.

Table 6: “Future Jobs Fund” and Capital Expenditure

(m)
Existing Capital Expenditure as per "Building on Recovery"
4-Year Rolling Average
Total Fiscal Space Used
Future Jobs Investment Fund (€4bn Cumulative Investment)
Revised Total
New 4-Year Rolling Average
Revised Fiscal Space Used
Extra Fiscal Space Used By Future Jobs Investment Fund

4,225

4,515

5,075

5,410

5,810

4,064
244

4,270
206
500
5,015
4,395
331
125

4,505
235
1,000
6,075
4,880
485
250

4,806
301
1,250
6,660
5,494
614
313

5,203
396
1,250
7,060
6,203
709
313

4,225
4,064
244
0

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

21

MORE AND BETTER JOBS

Box 3: Future Jobs Investment Fund
The extra capital expenditure through the Future Jobs Investment Fund amounts to e1 billion of the fiscal space
available until 2021. However, the total cash spend will be e4 billion. In part, this reflects the accumulation of
investment over the period of the forecast. However, it also reflects the fact that the relevant European fiscal
rules are designed to encourage capital rather than current spending.

• Advise on the design and implementation of
measures to support productivity and innovation
in the sheltered, private sectors of the economy.

sources of investment in research. As part of this
alignment we will open up the scope for enterprise
to deliver innovation to the public sector. We will
also ensure that the Knowledge Development Box
element of our corporation tax system supports the
research and development objectives of indigenous
Irish companies.

Entrepreneurship

We will also set ourselves a number of innovationspecific goals, including:

• Provide a set of recommendations to Government,
including a submission to the APJ, which will be
considered by Government within 6 weeks of
submission.

The
Government’s
“National
Strategy
for
Entrepreneurship” has created a roadmap to double
the contribution to job creation from start-ups over
a five year period. Fine Gael wants to see Ireland
become a European leader in the number of startups, as measured by their survival and growth rates.
Similarly, we want to see continued growth in the
important social enterprise sector.
During a second term of government we will extend
entrepreneurial tax reliefs while also increasing
awareness of the reliefs that are already available. We
will also look to implement controlled tax relief for debt
in businesses, where appropriate. We will incentivise
entrepreneurs by cutting the rate of capital gains tax,
particularly on small exits, and also improving the
treatment of limited share option schemes.
Fine Gael also plans to make Ireland a global leader
in the provision and development of talent in the
Key Enabling Technologies which are critical to both
our sectoral and Regional ambitions. National and
Regional targets for critical skill provision will be set
and new competitive funding models will encourage
their delivery in partnership with enterprise.

Innovation
Fine Gael in a second term will implement Innovation
2020, Ireland’s 5-year strategy for research and
development, science and technology. If growth is
to continue we will need to develop clusters which
will allow us to get early mover advantage from
innovation and emerging technologies. This will
require better alignment between public and private

22

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

• Delivering a 60% placement rate from Research
Centres to Enterprise
• Creating new models of collaborative research
• Establishing a new advanced manufacturing
research and training facility
• Introducing a new tiered Innovation Voucher
scheme for SMEs that would help to both
generate ideas and commercialise them, through
collaboration between the business and the
academic community
• Doubling
research

investment

in

publicly

performed

• Increasing the number of research personnel in
enterprise from 25,000 to 40,000
• Selecting a number of “grand” challenges which
we face as a society with respect to which a
competitive call from the mixed public / private
consortia would be sought
We will benchmark entrepreneurial activity in Irish
higher education against appropriate international
peers and work with the HEA to ensure an ambitious
and implementable plan to identify and address skills
gaps, ICT and STEM needs.

Training  and Apprenticeships
Fine Gael is determined to develop a highly valued
stream of education for the evolving technical skills
which are needed in Ireland’s new economy. Fine Gael
in partnership with the Apprenticeship Council and
industry will double the number of apprenticeships to
provide a total of 31,000 places by 2020 through an

annual call for new proposals. We are targeting over
100 different apprenticeship schemes spread across
sectors of the economy.
We will in addition make sure that existing enterprises
get the opportunity to improve their capability and to
step up to a new level – facilitated by training in the
areas of management, new lean processes, innovation,
and accessing new markets. We will commit extra
resources to mentoring in order to help SMEs to
maximise their potential. As part of this commitment,
we will ensure that small businesses can access the
National Training Fund for management training.

become a leading country for start-ups and that our
enterprises will more easily progress in capacity and
scale. To achieve this, we need to deliver €1 billion
per year from new sources of finance to supplement
normal bank offerings to SMEs. Such an ambitious
goal will require a mixture of sources and include:
• New forms of equity
• Mid-size investment rounds
• Development finance for manufacturing and
international services
• New forms of export and trade finance
• Peer-to-peer lending

Regulation
Administrative burdens act as a drag on the economic
recovery and Fine Gael will relentlessly seek to drive
down the administrative burden for business across
every level of the public service. To this end we will step
up the use of impact assessments across Government.
We will publish new guidelines taking account of the
latest EU and OECD smart regulation practices. A
screening impact assessment, at a minimum, will have
to accompany all primary legislation and significant
secondary legislation.
We will re-mandate the High Level Group on Business
Regulation to streamline the implementation of
the smart regulation agenda across all government
departments and ensure the public service is
implementing the agenda in line with latest
international best practice. The High Level Group will
be chaired by an external chairperson and supported
by a smart regulation unit to help support and
implement its work. We will also look to give the Group
additional authority and independence in driving its
agenda. As part of the smart regulation agenda we
will target a €1 billion reduction in the cost of the red
tape during the course of the next government.

Banking and Finance
Fine Gael has stabilised the banking sector, with both
AIB and Bank of Ireland functioning as strong universal
banks, and Permanent TSB increasingly operating as a
challenger bank. Fine Gael wants to see more entrants
and a vibrant banking sector with real competition in
order to support the recovering economy. We will
actively support measures to increase competition in
the market and achieve a fairer deal for consumers
and SMEs.
We recognise that access to finance will be absolutely
critical to realising our ambition that Ireland will

We will also ensure that there is careful monitoring
of the performance of the institutions in this area
(such as Microfinance Ireland and the SBCI) so that
we continually update our knowledge on the needs of
enterprise, as they emerge, as we move to deliver this
ambitious target.
Fine Gael believes the cost of bank finance to SMEs
should, with increased competition and continued
low bank funding costs, converge to the euro area
average and we will continue to put pressure on the
banks to ensure that reductions in their cost base are
reflected in their products. We also recognise the
valuable resource which the European Investment
Bank (EIB) represents, in delivering balanced regional
development. We will work with the EIB to:
• Facilitate easier access to capital, especially for
SMEs;
• Streamline procedures to help businesses across
Ireland to compete for EU-funded projects; and
• Focus on directing structural funds to the areas
most in need.

A Tax System to Support Enterprise
Fine Gael defended our corporation tax regime
throughout the financial crisis and we are committed
to maintaining the 12.5% rate into the future. We will
continue to work with our international partners in
tackling aggressive international tax planning through
the OECD’s Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS)
initiative. Fine Gael will also:
• Continue to improve the tax offer to small business
and eliminate the historical income tax discrepancy
that exists between PAYE workers and the selfemployed by 2018.
• Introduce a new lower Capital Gains Tax for startups in Ireland.

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

23

MORE
AND BETTER
JOBS
ARTS CULTURE
& HERITAGE

Chart
5: Exchequer
Capital
Envelope
20162016
to 2021
FIGURE
1: Exchequer
Capital
Envelope
to 2021

• Cut the lower rate of Employers’ PRSI, and widen
the lower rate band, to mitigate the impact on jobs
and small employers of further, sensible rises in the
minimum wage.
• Closely monitor the introduction of the Knowledge
Development Box (KDB), as set down in Finance
Bill 2015, with a special 6.25% rate of tax on income
from qualifying patents and other innovations, to
encourage both Irish and multi-national companies
to develop their knowledge-based capital in Ireland.

Infrastructure Investment
In line with the Building on Recovery strategy, Fine Gael
in Government will invest €42 billion in infrastructure
Table 7: Sectoral Share of Exchequer Capital Envelope, 2016-2021

24

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

investment over the period 2016 to 2021. This
excludes the investments which will be made through
the Future Jobs Investment Fund, and is both fiscally
sound and sustainable. It combines direct investment
by the Exchequer of €27 billion (see Chart 5), a third
phase of PPP investments of about €500 million
and State-owned sector investment of around €14.5
billion. In total, this State-backed investment package
represents over 3.5% of GNP each year between
2016 and 2021, and it will support more than 45,000
construction-related jobs.
Table 7 below illustrates the overall sectoral share of
the €27 billion Exchequer capital allocations over the
six years of the Capital Plan.

6: M
 aking Work Pay
(Step 2)
Fine Gael believes that work, rather than welfare, is the only sustainable route
out of poverty. The second step in our Plan is to make sure that, as more jobs are
created, work pays more than welfare and that hard work and entrepreneurship
are better rewarded.

STEP 2 of our Long Term Economic Plan is
to Make Work Pay
Fine Gael believes that work, rather than welfare, is
the only sustainable route out of poverty. The second
step in our Plan is to make sure that, as more jobs
are created, work pays more than welfare and that
hard work and entrepreneurship are better rewarded.
That’s why our Long Term Economic Plan commits to:
• Completing the abolition of the USC over a 5-year
period as part of a wider reform of the tax system
that keeps the tax base broad and limits the
benefits for the highest earners;
• Sensible, affordable increases in the minimum
wage over a 5-year period;
• A Working Family Payment designed to ensure
that every parent working 15 hours or more per
week takes home at least €11.75 per hour;

Making Work Pay through Tax Reform
The OECD has produced a hierarchy which ranks taxes
on the basis of their impact on economic growth. It
suggests that corporate income taxes are the most
harmful to growth, followed by personal income taxes
and then consumption taxes, with recurrent taxes on
immovable property the least harmful.
Since the introduction of the Universal Social Charge
(USC) by Fianna Fáil, Ireland’s personal tax system
has discouraged work and effort and is a barrier to
the economic recovery. Notwithstanding the cuts
made by this Government in the last two years, the
USC still pushes up marginal tax rates to excessive
levels by international standards - 29.5% at €19,000
of earnings (close to the minimum wage), 49.5% at
€33,800 (close to the average wage), 52% at €70,000
and 55% for self employed over €100,000.

• The extension of free GP care to the children of
working families by 2019; and

Chart 6 below shows how Ireland’s marginal tax rates
compare on an international basis, using 2014 figures.
Two things deserve particular attention:

• Rolling out a new scheme of subsidised, affordable
childcare for children aged 9-36 months.

First, Ireland had the 10th highest marginal tax rates in
the world. Higher than both the US and the UK.

Through these measures our plan aims to move
70,000 unemployed people into a job by 2020, cut
the national unemployment rate to 6%, and reduce
the numbers of people living in Jobless Households
towards the European average.

Second, and as importantly, the point at which
individuals pay the higher tax rate is very low. In Ireland
people in 2014 started paying the highest tax rate
at an income of €32,800 - below the average wage
of €34,466. In the UK, by contrast, people started

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

25

MAKING WORK PAY

Table 8: Long Term Economic Plan - Tax Reform Package

(em)
USC Abolition
Carry-Over of Budget 2021 USC / Tax Package into 2022
Clawbacks from Highest Earners
Excise Duties on Cigarettes / Nicotine
Improve Tax Compliance by 0.1% of Taxes Collected
Other Measures
Total Fiscal Space used by Tax Reform Package, 2017-2021

paying the higher rates of tax on an income which is
4.2 times the average wage. In Spain the higher rate
tax threshold was 11.7 times the average wage in Spain
and in Greece it was 5.6. Even after budget changes in
2015, which significantly increased the threshold, the
multiple in Ireland is still only 2 (See Chart 6 below).

3,700
-246
-607
-349
-250
210
2,458

income tax and PRSI bases (i.e. measures that did
not increase tax rates), therby nullifying one of the
reasons for the introduction of the USC in the first
place;
• Reinforce the link between contributions and
benefits through the PRSI system in order to
promote life-long attachment to the labour force.
Unlike PRSI, the USC confers no benefits on taxpayers (we will set out further details in our
comprehensive tax reform plan);

As the UK and other countries seek to match
Ireland’s corporation tax rate, our Plan aims to keep
the recovery going by reducing marginal tax rates
on income. Building on the progress made in our last
two budgets, the Plan will commit €2.5 billion of the
fiscal space available to complete the abolition of
the USC by end 2020, as part of a wider set of tax
reforms that will:

• Cut marginal income tax rates for everybody in
order to improve work incentives, including cutting
the maximum tax rate for middle income earners
(less than €70,000) to 44% from a peak of 52%
introduced by Fianna Fáil;

• Simplify the tax system by reducing from three
to two the number of taxes on low- and middleincome earners;

• Limit the benefits for high earners, while reducing
marginal tax rates below 50% for all earners (we
will set out further details in our comprehensive
tax reform plan);

• Continue to broaden the income and wider tax
base, including by keeping the entry point into
the income tax system at €13,000. Measures have
been introduced in recent years to broaden the

• Shift the burden of taxation away from employment
towards the taxation of “bads”. Consistent with our

Chart 6: Irish Marginal Tax Rates Are High by International Comparison

70

Top Marginal Tax Rate
(%)

60

Portugal

France

50

Ireland
UK

Spain
Germany

US

Greece

Threshold (multiple
of average wage)

40
5

26

10

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

15

20

Table 9: Replacement Rates for Parents

Replacement Rate Cat
>70
>80
>90
>100

Estimated sub-popula

Healthy Ireland Strategy and recent Budgets, we
will increase taxes on nicotine related products;
and
• Continue to improve compliance and enforcement
(building on the €75m in tax compliance measures
in Budget 2016, the Plan will an additional 200 data
analytics and enforcement staff for the Revenue
Commissioners in 2017-21 to boost compliance
rates by an extra €50 million each year (0.1% of the
tax yield).
Abolishing the USC will make a major contribution to
economic growth in a number of ways:
• It will reduce the “tax wedge” in Ireland, which is
the difference between what an employer pays and
what the employee receives. A lower tax wedge
will aid job creation and encourage more people to
choose work over welfare.
• It will improve the potential potency of remaining
capital allowances / reliefs designed to support
enterprise, innovation and exporting;
• It will assist Irish companies and the public service
in the global war for talent.

• It will encourage greater labour force participation
by both women and those in part time employment.
Second earners in a family, many of whom are
women and/or in part time employment, can enter
a 49.5% tax band if they earn over €24,800.
• It will offer emigrants another strong reason to
return home.

Making Work Pay through Welfare Reform
This Government has started the job of overhauling
the social welfare system, transforming it from a
passive welfare system into an active and responsive
employment service. Rather than sustain a system
that encourages welfare dependency, we want to
create a system that fosters independence through
retraining and employment. While there has been
good progress, unemployment remains too high, and
too many parents in particular are better on welfare
than in work (see Table 9 above).
The replacement rate is the most commonly used
single measure of the incentive to be in work. It
measures the proportion of in-work income which
would be retained or replaced (e.g., by jobseeker
payments) when out of work. A high replacement rate

Table 10: High Replacement Rates in Ireland

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

27

MAKING WORK PAY

is typically above 70%. As Table 10 below shows, 18.3%
of the unemployed in Ireland have a replacement rate
of more than 70%, while 11% have a replacement rate
of more than 80%. In a 2014 report the ESRI looked
at the replacement rate for unemployed individuals
in jobless and non-jobless households. Unemployed
individuals in the former are more than 2.5 times
more likely to face a high replacement rate (over 70
per cent) and 3.5 times more likely to face a very high
replacement rate (over 90 per cent).
Our Long Term Economic Plan commits to a series of
targeted measures to help parents return to work and
ensure that work always pays more than welfare.

Sensible, Affordable Rises in the Minimum
Wage
This month, the Government increased the minimum
wage to €9.15 per hour, partially offset for employers
by a widening of the band of the lower 8.5% rate of
Employers’ PRSI. To make work pay, we will support
further, sensible increases in the minimum wage over
a 5-year period. We will again mitigate the impact
on jobs through a cut in the lower rate of Employers’
PRSI, as well as a further widening of the lower rate
band.

The Working Family Payment
The current Family Income Supplement creates
major hurdles for unemployed parents transiting from
jobseekers welfare into work, and also locks many
parents into working fewer hours. Under the current
set-up, if someone on Jobseekers Allowance works
more than 3 days they are cut off welfare entirely and
if they work less than 19 hours over 4 days or more a
week they do not receive any income support at all.
Our Plan will replace Family Income Supplement for
new entrants with a new Working Family Payment.
Targeted at low-income families, it will supplement, on
a graduated basis, the income of a household, while at
the same time incentivising more hours and full-time
work. It will ensure that parents working more than 15
hours a week will receive at least €11.75 an hour.
By better aligning the Working Family Payment with
existing jobseeker supports, there will be a seamless
transition from welfare to work for families and many
of the welfare traps families face will be eliminated.

28

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

We will mandate the Low Pay Commission to make
recommendations to the Government on the phased
introduction of the Working Family Payment, from
2018.
We will separately publish the details of the Working
Family Payment.

Housing, Childcare and Medical Costs for
Working Parents
Recipients of Rent Supplement are faced with the
worst welfare trap, with lone parents and larger families
at particular risk. Fine Gael will roll out nationwide the
Housing Assistance Payment, which provides housing
support based on income and not employment status.
This means that parents can return to work after a
spell of unemployment without complete loss of their
housing support payment.
We will extend free GP care for the children of all
working families under 18 (unemployed parents
already receive free GP care through the medical
card). We will publish the details of our health reform
plans in a separate document.
Parents need affordable childcare that makes work
pay. We understand that at each stage of a child’s
development their needs change and we will provide
quality and flexible options for families to avail of. In
particular, we will extend paid leave for parents in the
first year of a child’s life and roll out a new scheme
of subsidised, affordable childcare for children aged
9-36 months.
We will separately publish the details of our childcare
plans.

Work Activation – Pathways to Work
Over the last few years the Government’s “Pathways
to Work” plan has begun the process of transforming
the Irish welfare system into an active employment
support service from the passive payments system
we inherited after 14 years of Fianna Fáil Government.
Fianna Fáil’s disastrous ‘hands off’ approach to
social welfare policy led directly to families being
trapped in cycles of joblessness, poverty and welfare
dependency. Instead of investing in job support
services and helping get the long term unemployed
back into work Fianna Fáil just hiked welfare payments

without reform which ensured that even during the
boom years Ireland suffered from one of the highest
rates of jobless households in Europe.
Fine Gael wants to see people independent in work,
not dependent on welfare. We believe that a job is
the best route out of poverty, that work should pay,
and that people should not be abandoned on the
dole queues. The first Pathways to Work strategy
– combined with our job creation strategies – cut
the numbers of people unemployed since 2012 by
almost 40%. The establishment of Intreo Offices,
and new activation programmes and supports
such as JobBridge, JobsPlus, Springboard courses,
Momentum courses, the new Housing Assistance
Payment, the Youth Guarantee, are engaging with
unemployed people every day to help them back
into work. These developments have also contributed
to decreases in Long-Term Unemployment which
decreased from 9.5% to 5%, and Youth Unemployment
which decreased from 33% to 19.1%.
While we have made progress, there are still too many
people in jobless households. We are determined that
nobody will be left behind by our economic recovery.
For this reason the next phase of our plan will be more
radical to end the plight of jobless households. In our
new Pathways to Strategy, published in January, which
covers the next five years, we are setting a new target
to move another 50,000 Long-Term Unemployed
people into jobs. Furthermore, this year, 60,000
Long-Term Unemployed people will be referred to
our contracted employment service which will offer
essential group and one-on-one support services.
If we can keep the recovery going, we will encourage
others back to the labour market and into jobs.
Expanding activation as a tool of social inclusion will
be an important element of our plan which sets a
target for boosting the employment rate for people
with disabilities so that those who wish to do so can

participate more fully in society. This strategy will also
work in hand in hand with the ongoing reforms in the
apprenticeship and further education sector.

Jobless Households
While progress has been made, it is clear that more
must be done to tackle the challenge of Jobless
Households as part of an overall strategy of making
work pay. Household joblessness, as a measure of
economic inactivity, differs from traditional measures
of unemployment in two important ways:
It includes people who do not have a job but may not
be formally categorised as being unemployed, e.g.,
carers or those who have an illness or disability; and
It takes into account whether other adults in the same
household are also out of work.
The number of Jobless Households has consistently
been much higher in Ireland than in other European
countries, even during the boom, suggesting that
there are deep-seated structural problems which
have never been adequately addressed. This gap is
critically important because research very clearly
indicates that household joblessness is a major risk
factor for poverty and welfare dependency and has a
major negative impact on Irish child poverty rates in
particular. Between 2004 and 2007, a period of very
low unemployment and rapid jobs growth, the share
of the State’s households defined as jobless recorded
a double-digit increase to reach 15% of the total.
Building on the success of the Pathways to Work
Action Plan during our first term, Fine Gael will
publish a specific Pathways to Work Plan for Jobless
Households. It will have specific targets for key groups
of individuals within jobless households and updates
to the Plan will be published on a regular basis. The
Action Plan will set out a timeline for reducing the
level of Jobless Households to the European average.

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

29

INVESTING IN PUBLIC SERVICES

7: Investing in Public Services
(Step 3)
Fine Gael has learnt from the mistakes made by previous Governments – we
know that only a strong economy which supports people at work can pay for
the services needed for a just society.

A strong commitment to reform and a businessfriendly environment “have helped Ireland return to
robust economic expansion, offering the government
an opportunity to heal the scars of the crisis” (OECD
Economic Survey of Ireland September 2015).
With the boost to the public finances from increasing
numbers back at work, which will grow taxes and
reduce costs, and a growing economy, the third step
in our Plan is to continue to make sensible investments
in public services that improve the overall quality of
life of our people, and which protect weakest and
most the vulnerable in our society from poverty and
deprivation.
The baseline current expenditure forecasts published
by the Department of Finance in the October
Budget book provide for e2.6 billion of Government
commitments on:
• public service pay and pensions (Lansdowne Road
Agreement);
• full-year (“carry-over”) costs in 2017 of service
improvements begun this year (second free preschool year, free GP care for 6-11 year olds, cut in
pupil-teacher ratio etc.);
• other
current
expenditure
programme
commitments over the coming years (e.g. Rural
Development Programme); and
• the rising cost of delivering existing services and
welfare entitlements to a growing and ageing
population. The 22.25 billion provision for

30

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

“demographic pressures” will fund, among other
things:
• increased numbers of child benefit payments
• rising teacher numbers needed to maintain
the pupil-teacher ratio
• rising student numbers in higher education
• the fast increase in the numbers of pensioners
• the growth in the number of medical cards
• the rising cost of older care services (the “Fair
Deal,” and the increase in the numbers of
Home Help hours and Home Care packages
for an ageing population)
• additional HSE doctors, nurses and other
medical professionals and other additional
hospital costs to cater for a rising and ageing
population
These existing commitments and pressures will
be partially offset by falling live register costs as
unemployment declines, and will be accommodated
within the fiscal space available under the Long Term
Economic Plan.
In addition, if we can keep the recovery going, the
Long Term Economic Plan will allocate €4.2 billion for
additional current spending growth to fund, among
other things:
• a total of 10,000 additional doctors, nurses, Gardaí,
teachers, social workers and other front-line service

professionals within a well-run and cost effective
public service;
• responsible and sustainable public service growth
following the expiration of the Lansdowne Road
Agreement (2019-21)
• more investment in health services, and a decisive
shift towards primary and community care;
• higher weekly social welfare payments
pensioners, carers, the disabled and the sick;

to

• a package of measures for the elderly to support
their independence and social participation in their
retirement years; and
• a package of measures for children and families,
with a particular focus on early interventions to
give every child a better start in life.
The details of these service commitments will be set
out in subsequent documents. Many of the these
spending commitments reflect not only service
improvements, but also the need to ensure that pay
and pensions, for example, match or exceed the rate
of inflation. Such an “indexing” approach would be
inappropriate for many other areas of Government
spending, where there is an obligation on Government
to improve value for money. For example, far from
indexing the cost of Government procurement to
the overall rate of inflation, our economic plan aims
to cut the cash costs of public procurement by €300
million in 2016-18, through the work of the new Office
of Government Procurement.

Public Sector Reform
As we increase public spending, we will also continue
to reform the public sector to make it more efficient
and more responsive to the needs of citizens and to
improve value for money. Our goal is to create a public
service which will:
• Deliver measurable improvement in core outcomes
for citizens against which progress will be
measured and professionally accounted for using,
among other things, international benchmarks;

• Produce measurable improvements in productivity
each year, by embracing innovation, including the
use of new technologies and work practices to
deliver services; and
• Offer more opportunity for staff development and
promotion.
To promote greater public awareness and transparency
we will send all taxpayers a breakdown of how their
annual contributions have been proportionally spent.
To achieve these goals we will empower frontline
service providers to make more decisions, encourage
more collaboration between public service bodies,
and between the public and private sectors, reward
public service innovation and change, and allocate
scarce resources using more competitive processes
that shift budgets to successful programmes.

Greater Focus on Early Intervention
It is not enough to simply invest more in services.
Spending must be targeted with a view to tacking
the underlying causes of poor health, suboptimal
education results, etc. One of the most consistent
findings from modern social research is that by
investing in a child’s early years both the economy and
society reaps large dividends. Early years’ investment
is associated with a host of positive outcomes
including higher secondary school completion and
employment rates, higher lifetime earnings, and
reduced crime rates. It is also one of the single most
effective ways of tackling intergenerational cycles of
joblessness and poverty.
Fine Gael will establish a dedicated Prevention
and Early Intervention Unit in the Department of
Public Expenditure and Reform. It will focus on
early intervention policies that can improve the life
outcomes of children in particular, as well as the
quality of life for older people dealing with Long Term
conditions such as obesity, alcohol dependency and
chronic illness. The unit will also produce an annual
report outlining the percentage of departmental

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

31

INVESTING IN PUBLIC SERVICES

budgets which is devoted to early intervention and
Long Term planning on social issues, and recommend
changes. It will oversee and monitor the impact of
a number of new Prevention and Early Intervention
programmes to be implemented by line departments.

Providing Opportunity for All
Education is the key to giving every child an equal
opportunity in life and a key driver of our economic
recovery. Ireland’s education system continues to
serve most, though not all, of our children and parents
well. We have a well-trained and committed teaching
profession and high and rising rates of school
completion and participation in higher education.
And yet, too many of our children still fall through the
cracks, and are in danger of being left behind in a fastchanging world. Fine Gael will publish a 4-point plan
to invest in a reformed and well-managed education
system that makes sure that the economic recovery
leaves no child behind.

Better Health Services for All
Fine Gael inherited a badly organised and underfunded
health service. While Fianna Fáil cut health spending
during its final years in government, Fine Gael has
used the economic recovery to start rebuilding our
health services, with sensible increases in funding for
more doctors, nurses and other frontline staff and for
free GP care for the under 6s and over 70s.
Our health services employ dedicated and highly
skilled professionals, but need more investment and
reform – more doctors and nurses, more empowered
local management, more investment in technology
and a decisive shift towards care outside of hospitals
and in the community. Only a strong economy will
provide our country with the foundation needed for
better health services. We will set out in full our plan
for Universal Health Care – affordable and timely
access to health services on the basis of need.

Focusing on the Early Years
This Government has a track record of putting children
first. Despite the economic crisis we inherited from
Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael prioritised our children’s welfare

32

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

by creating the first dedicated Cabinet Minister for
Children, establishing a new Child and Family Agency,
introducing transformative child protection legislation,
and holding a children’s referendum. We have also
provided a second free pre-school year, introduced
free GP care for under 6s and have committed the
necessary funding to the extension of free GP care to
6-11 year olds later in 2016 (subject to the finalisation
of negotiations with GPs).
Fine Gael’s Long Term Economic Plan ensures that
our focus remains on the early years and on early
intervention for young people so that they can reach
their full potential. In particular, we will roll out a new
scheme of subsidised, affordable childcare for children
aged 9-36 months.

Supporting Older People
Over the next 30 years the number of people aged
over 65 will double. Indeed, as we are living longer, the
number of us living to be over 80 is set to quadruple.
It makes it all the more important that we plan, design
and deliver services appropriately, in order to keep
people living independently in their homes. Fine Gael’s
Long Term Economic Plan will help generate the
resources to fund affordable, tangible improvements
in the living standards and quality of life of our older
generation.

Empowering People with Disability
Fine Gael will continue to work to improve equality
of opportunity and quality of life for people with
disabilities and ensure that resources are allocated
effectively and transparently. Despite the economic
crisis faced by the country in recent years, Fine
Gael has maintained disability spending and sought
to progress critical policy changes that will benefit
people with disabilities. In a second term, we will do
more to empower and improve the lives of people
with disabilities. Our Long Term Economic Plan will
help provide for this, while also freeing up resources
for enhanced and targeted public services.

More Gardai
Fine Gael is committed to the delivery of an effective,
visible and responsive policing service to prevent

and pursue crime and to protect our communities,
both rural and urban. In Government, we ended the
moratorium on Garda recruitment, reopened the
Garda College in Templemore to new recruits and
have invested over €34m in 1,300 new Garda vehicles
since 2012. Fine Gael is committed in a second term to
the recruitment of additional Gardai as the economy
continues to grow.

More Sustainable Housing
Fine Gael understands that an affordable supply
of quality housing is essential for maintaining our
economic competitiveness and keeping the recovery
going. During a second term of government we will
support a doubling of housing output to 25,000 per
year by 2020. Our goal is to create a properly working
and well regulated housing and construction market
with stable rewards for investors, security for families,
and with a sustainable and balanced model for social
housing provision.
One of the legacies of the boom and bust approach
to housing development historically is the number of
people without a home. It is not acceptable that in 2016
we have families living in emergency accommodation.
A key priority for Fine Gael in a second term will be to
boost the affordable housing supply to stem the tide
of homelessness for low-income families.

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

33

INVESTING IN PUBLIC SERVICES

8:Conclusion
This year marks the centenary of the declaration of the Irish Republic. It provides
us all with a unique opportunity “to examine not only who we were, but who we
want to become as a nation, a society, a real republic.”2

This year marks the centenary of the declaration of
the Irish Republic. It provides us all with a unique
opportunity “to examine not only who we were, but
who we want to become as a nation, a society, a real
republic.”2
Fine Gael has learnt from the mistakes made by
previous governments. We are determined not to
let Ireland go back – not to those who wrecked our
economy in the first place, and not to those who
would kill jobs with new taxes on work. We know that
only a Strong Economy that supports people at work
can pay for the services we need to build a truly Just
Society.
Our Long Term Economic Plan will help deliver that
strong economy. An economy where:

• Everyone who needs a job can find one;
• Work always pays more than welfare;
• Stable, enterprise led growth can supply the
resources we need to fund high quality services;
and
• Sensible management of the public finances will
protect us from future economic shocks.
While significant risks remain, particularly with
respect to the global economy, we now have it in our
grasp to make Ireland a country where our people
can once again prosper, work, start a business, raise a
family and grow old with dignity. To build, as we mark
the centenary of 1916, a real and truly just republic in
Ireland.

2. Speech by An Taoiseach, Enda Kenny to the 78th Fine Gael Ard Fheis, 23 January 2016.

34

A LONG TERM ECONOMIC PLAN
To Keep The Recovery Going

National Headquarters, 51 Upper Mount Street, Dublin 2, D02 W924.
Tel: 01 619 8444 Email: finegael@finegael.ie www.finegael.ie
Facebook: facebook.com/fine.gael; facebook.com/endakennyofficial
Twitter: @finegael @EndaKennyTD Youtube: youtube.com/finegael

Printed and Published by Fine Gael, 51 Upper Mount Street, Dublin 2, D02 W924.

